# DotPlot3D

Welcome to DotPlot3D - **A Novel Data Visualisation Tool for Nucleotide Sequences**

DotPlot3D is a tool that expands on existing dot plot methodology and creates an output for three sequences in an interactive, user-friendly interface.  In comparison to other methods, this  allows for expansion beyond pairwise alignment, provides different colour and sizing for the generated points to reduce noise, and easily identifies regions of interest and synteny between sequences. The repository contains the dot plot tool, as well as a supplementary table that acts as a precursor step before conducting analyses. A working version can be downloaded and accessed through this repository.

The following tools are available:
- An analysis table that can be downloaded to view regions of similarity before using the DotPlot3D tool. This includes a comparison at each position to highlight areas of comparison that might be used within the dot plot tool
- Traditional dot plot tool, with comparison of three sequences. This does not include varying size, but does map based on 
- Added features for transition/transversion, and synonymous/synonymous sites: extension to tradition tool for further analysis.

## Background

Sequence alignment and visualisation are crucial tools in bioinformatics, helping to make conclusions on the synteny, evolutionary descent, and classification of nucleotide and protein sequences (Misale et al., 2014). There are a myriad of different options for visualisation and identification of specific mutation patterns (Li & Homer, 2010). These include pairwise and multiple alignment tools, which aim to compare the data and identify regions of interest throughout the entire genome, or at a specific site. This can help make distinct classifications and look at synteny throughout the sequence (Mullan, 2006). A combination of this with database search tools such as BLAST can be used to find other similar queries and their statistical significance (Ye et al., 2006). In general, sequence alignment tools are effective methods to integrate and use together, making broader conclusions from several analyses.
One popularised method for visualisation is a dot plot. While its usage can be dated back to 1970 (Gibbs & Mcintyre, 1970), the integration of plots on a graphical user interface was first implemented decades later (Sonnhammer & Durbin, 1995). A dot plot is a traditional form of matrix analysis where two protein or nucleic acid sequences are compared through repeats, conserved domains, insertions, and deletions. They are traditionally considered to be pairwise alignment tools, since they provide matrix analysis in a two-dimensional format (Wilkinson, 1999). Through varying shades, line forms, and thickness, they can represent similarities and differences in a simple-to-use manner. This can be plotted manually or through software that provides comparison through database search and input of FASTA sequences (Krumsiek et al., 2007). As one of the first interpretation tools for sequence alignment, there are many benefits to its usage, mainly due to its simplification and easy visualisation (Wilkinson, 1999). 

## Applications
As a part of testing the validity of the tool, it is important to consider instances where there are three sequences to compare. One of the most prominent examples would be in disease tracking and the evolution of common pathogens. A key example of this can be seen in the study by Dartmann et al. (1986) conducted a comparison of HPV type 11 (HPV11), type 6b (HBV6b), and type 16 (HPV16). Analysis was completed for amino acid and nucleotide sequence homologies, using two separate dot plots to compare with HPV11. While the results presented an adequate amount of information on the specific sequences, plots were separately introduced for HPV11 with HBV6b and HBV16. The homologies of the open reading frames were compared, however, they were separately plotted and similarities between all three together were unable to be completed (Dartmann et al., 1986). Percent homology was not compared with all groups and the dot plot was generally difficult to interpret due to noise and lack of clarity on a grayscale. With the implementation of DotPlot3D, all three sequences can be compared at once, and a collective analysis can be made.
Similarly, The usage of DotPlot3D can also be applied within the realm of tracking and classifying DNA from pathogens. During the COVID-19 pandemic, genomic surveillance and monitoring changes were important from a healthcare perspective, to look at what sequences were the most concerning, and which mutations caused them to survive effectively (Vijgen et al., 2005). This is also relevant in analysing various aggressive strains of commonly contracted viruses such as influenza and HPV, that can be examined in-depth.
